[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger in
this video we celebrate having passed the
200 video Mark in this series on the foundations
of mathematics so it's a kind of a happy occasion
it's a time for us to look back briefly and
summarize some of the things that we've been
accomplishing and also to look forward to the
future and the new directions that we're going
to pursue in this series so this is one of the
very few places on planet Earth where we are
seriously looking at foundational issues in modern
pure mathematics the usual assumption is that all
of these issues have more or less already been
discussed and resolved and everything is more or
less in place and okay but we recognize that
this is not only not true but it's actually
actually far from being true and that there are
huge opportunities in terms of restructuring the
subject in a very dramatic way by going back to
the basics and asking tough pointed questions
what exactly are we talking about in this domain
or in this domain or in this domain so we've had
a look at a lot of different topics so far we've
of course started with arithmetic and geometry
obvious uh starting points for mathematics and
then moved on to algebra we've had a look at
various aspects coming from algebra and geometry
we had a look at rational trigonometry we focused
quite a lot on the current problems with real
numbers which are a very serious issue limits
talk about areas and volumes bit of algebra
isometries and groups and then we've been
looking in the last little while at Replacements
for this current preoccupation with set theory we
want to enlarge our you to think about not just
sets but other data structures as well we talked
a little bit about Realms we talked a little
bit about maxel and pixels as a replacement for
matrices moving towards understanding of basic
linear algebra and in the last few videos we've
been talking about big numbers hyper operations
going Beyond multiplication and exponentiation
and we've actually gone back to reformulate and
rethink some fundamental results in arithmetic so
we've done quite a lot but there's still a lot
to be done so the unfortunate reality is that
modern pure mathematics has very serious logical
difficulties very serious logical difficulties and
it's important to emphasize that I'm talking about
pure mathematics here and that Applied Mathematics
and statistics and related areas are really
outside of my view here okay Applied Mathematics
is doing really powerful and great things but here
in pure mathematics we have serious problems we
are starting to paint ourselves into kind of
a narrow Corner we're all scrambling around
in this I think rather restricted area I want to
open us up open up the subject and really really
give people opportunities for exciting important
new developments not just adding Epsilon to some
huge existing Theory some little addendum of
something but there's really an opportunity for
making fundamental contributions in reconfiguring
a lot of the mathematical landscape okay so the
logical difficulties inevitably circle around
the same issues so once you get the hang of it
you start seeing the problems in many many areas
almost always weak or unclear definitions are near
the heart part of the matter the fact that we're
not being precise enough in specifying exactly
what we're talking about okay this is what
characterizes mathematics and sets it apart
from all these other aspects of human endeavor
and intellectual thought in mathematics we're
able to precisely nail down what exactly we're
talking about so that everybody can listen and can
effectively work with the same Notions and when we
don't do that or only partially do that or pretend
that some loose vague definition is really good
enough then we're not just fooling other people
we're fooling ourselves and this is the heart
of many many of the problems in mathematics
ultimately correspondingly there's a lack
of solid representative examples in many
theories right mathematical theories ought to be
supported by a wealth of examples and examples
that are really illustrative of what we're talking
about it's unfair if we try to uh illustrate very
complicated theories with ultimately overly simple
examples even though they officially work but they
don't capture the representative complexity of
the theory that we're trying to outline there's
increasingly a Reliance on intuition experts have
this intuition and this is often invoked instead
of actual sort of computations and arguments that
you can follow step by step there's an Orthodoxy
that has descended on the subject certain things
one just is allowed to say and nobody questions
them there's a lot of appeals to Authority so and
so is a very important person a very smart person
they probably think such and such therefore
it's okay therefore we should think along the
same lines and I think there's a you know a
tendency to overemphasize the importance of
abstraction it's very abstract it's complicated
it's uh sophisticated that's better than having
something that's simple-minded and clear that
everybody can see and understand we've boxed
ourselves into to a little bit of a corner here we
have a lot of wishful thinking going on instead of
rigorous thinking so the foundations of analysis
are very weak people don't want to acknowledge
that so there's a lot of wishful thinking about
well let's just accept things and let's just
suppose that our justifications really do work
and I think we've lost touch with the importance
of concrete computations if you go back to Papers
written in the 17th or 18th centuries you see more
computations you see lots of equations these days
when you look at a fancy mathematical paper in a
esteem Journal you're likely as not to see lots
of text there's a lot of talking and every so
often there's a formula okay the the tone of the
articles is uh very different we have somehow gone
up to this level of abstraction where we no longer
really directly in touch with the the computation
aspects of a lot of things that we're doing
it's a bit of a problem maybe it's quite a lot
of a problem so if I had to present a simplified
overview of sort of where the problems sit uh a
lot of them are really located or adjacent to one
particular core problem which is a core problem
in mathematics that goes back thousands of years
and this is really the problem of the Continuum
of how to model mathematically what we see here
as being seemingly something that's continuous
without any gaps without any holes uniform how do
we actually get at that as opposed to the discret
aspect of counting 1 2 3 4 five where we have our
algebraic numerical system to help us so going
from the discret to the Continuum it's a huge
huge step it's very complicated there's all kind
of problems conceptual and otherwise involved in
this and it's really the problems that come from
dealing with this Continuum that infest so many of
um modern pure mathematical topics so prominantly
amongst this is analysis so analysis of course
is resting on the Continuum that's the basic
framework in which everything happens so weakness
with the fundamental definition of the Continuum
naturally ends up casting a very big Shadow over
analysis and of course calculus as well but it's
important to realize that that shadow covers
a lot of other disciplines as well right so
most modern mathematical topics are affected by
this difficulty this imprecision that we have in
getting to grips what what exactly the Continuum
is so number theory is a affected algebraic
geometry is affected for example algebraic
geometers like to work over algebraically
closed Fields okay so these are some kind of
algebraic equivalents or generalizations of the
real numbers or/ complex number framework that
the analysts have built uh for their Theory and
so there's really a Reliance implicit in algebraic
geometry and also parts of modern algebra on this
Continuum based analysis okay so the weaknesses
here end up directly affecting algebraic geometry
modern algebra of course topology obviously
because topology is a kind of an end dimensional
extension or an attempt at extending notion
of the Continuum the simple one-dimensional
Continuum differential geometry runs into a
lot of the same kind of problems it's sort of a
combination of ology and Analysis so the problems
that are here obviously get reflected there now
this is not all of pure mathematics okay there
are some areas that are immune or largely immune
to these difficulties prominent amongst them are
combinatorics and rational trigonometry and the
computational side of mathematics and increasingly
what's happening is that these subject objects are
going in a different direction the gap between
them and the rest of mathematics is is increasing
and it's very interesting to watch how a lot of
the disciplines here are trying to move towards
combinatorics especially of course they haven't
understood rational trigonometry yet so they're
not yet aware that that's a good place to go
but certainly they appreciate the importance
of combinatorics and its solid foundational
aspect and so a lot of these disciplines are
trying to to move towards common toric whether
they want to you know phrase it that way or not
and of course also trying to link to the obvious
growth of computational issues but by and large
what's happening is that there's you know
a separation between the the dock and this
floating ship and and you know you've got one
leg on one side one leg on the other side and
it's becoming increasingly awkward to try to
maintain a connection between these two things
some of the problems the core problems surrounding
this Continuum problem have been talked about it's
some length in my famous math problems 19 videos
there's four of them there that talk all about
sort of the history of this and sort of give
you an overview of what's going on there and
it's important to recognize that also an important
part of the story is how we've tried to patch up
the difficulties so basically what we've done is
we've uh accept the help from the philosophers so
what we've done is we've imported some solutions
from philosophy notably logic and infinite set
theory and these have sort of been you know added
on or tacked on to the fundamental problem of the
continu trying to sort of patch up how things
go because the analysts themselves haven't
been able to solidly really come up with a model
that's solid sort of pure mathematics now these
days it's presented as if these two subjects are
actually part of mathematics but as we will see
historically that's not the case that they're
really coming from philosophy and in my view
they're just Band-Aid solutions that if you look
carefully at them you know somewhat critically
you see that They Don't Really Work to address
the fundamental problems that we have we need
different kind of thinking so what do I propose
that we're going to do you how are we going to
move forward on this well what I'm going to try to
do here in this series is first of all I'm going
to carry on exposing the problems I'm not going to
shy away from that someone has to do this someone
has to lay out what the problems are and I guess
it's me okay I also want to provide a stronger and
more sensible and beautiful alternative to things
so I don't want to just criticize but I also want
to say okay this is not really working guys
but look over here here's an alternative here's
something that we can do which is a lot more solid
which is a lot more natural which ultimately maybe
is more powerful so I want to provide Alternatives
and I want to lead by example I want to try to be
clear I want to try to be sort of basic not rely
on sophistication I want to have explicit examples
I want to show you concrete computations along
the lines that I've been doing in this series
so that I don't want to like pull the wool
over your eyes or you know get you to believe
something that you can't actually be convinced
of so I want to convince you of stuff that's I
think the job of a mathematician and what we are
going to be increasingly looking at is some of
the sociological aspects you know how did we get
ourselves in this mess uh I currently think that
we are suffering a little bit from what might be
called The Cult of complexity in pure mathematics
this kind of reverence for super sophisticated
complicated reasoning that one can't actually
follow or not so easily but it seems impressive
and soone goes oh yeah sure you know nods a lot
of people nodding without understanding I think
that's unfortunate I think it's gripping a lot of
mathematics and I would like to identify it and
sort of put the cards on the table so people can
see what's actually going on from a sociological
point of view as well as a mathematical one all
right so where are we going to go in the near
future in the math Foundation series so I don't
have it completely mapped out in my mind but I
have a rough idea of things that need to be done
and so I will choose some order of doing those
things do a little bit in one topic until I feel
it's time to to make a change and then we'll go
off in some other direction but I'm hoping that
we will cover a lot of interesting and important
stuff in the next few hundred videos if we get
that far okay certainly coming up in the near
future is some more disruptive big number Theory
we've already sort of shaking the cage with
respect to big numbers but we want to do a lot
more of that and that will be quite disruptive for
uh traditional number theorists we want to have a
look at feel Theory and how we can set that up and
I'm going to be relying a little bit on our newly
created maxel Theory it's a very attractive
way of doing that then of course ultimately
we have to get around to a full critique of
set theory I mean I've been criticizing set
theory on and off as we as we're going but we
really have to you know bring the guns to bear
and and really expose just how weak This Modern
Theory really is and the attendant Reliance on
axima we really have to sort of try to uh peel
people's uh addiction to these things you know
away so we want to move away from belief systems
especially belief systems in things which are not
very clearly defined as is rampant in modern
set theory unfortunately we're going to have
to identify more clearly the role of philosophy
in mathematics and particularly this uh naughty
issue of what exactly logic is and how it fits
into the the connection between philosophy and
Mathematics so logic really comes from philosophy
it's sort of being imported into mathematics in a
kind of an way and we have to talk about that
very very important the data structure stuff
that we've been doing is fun and it's really a
foundation for uh moving into some interesting
aspects of comat TOs and so that'll be a very
nice thing that we can do and then of course we
have to move towards addressing the weaknesses in
calculus and then the attendant difficulties in
analysis oh there's so much to say about this um
but you know you can get started yourself open up
a calculus book and you know Skip all the nice
diagrams and and fancy things and just look at
the logical structure of things you will see that
it's all over the shop you know there's all these
things which are not defined clearly there's all
these sort of Reliance on on important results
that are imported from somewhere else there's not
this idea of setting mathematics you know down in
a coherent step byep way that everybody can follow
the logical argument so there's a lot to be said
about the weaknesses of calculus and Analysis and
we're going to have to address that we're going to
have to rethink topology that's a lot of fun and
uh and there will be lots more things too okay but
these are some of the topics that we are going
to be looking at in the near future in the math
foundations Series so things to look forward to
now it's one thing to criticize Cal calculus and
Analysis but something quite different to create
a viable alternative and that's something that
I have been thinking about quite a lot over the
years and I'm now moving towards a a new kind of
exposition of what I call the algebraic calculus
and what I have in mind is something that's going
to be outside the math Foundation series so
something separate that will be essentially
a standalone course on the algebraic Ulus and
it'll be something different from my YouTube
series So the plan is that there will be problems
and exercises it'll be like a course an online
course that you can take and I'm working on that
but it'll still be a while before that's ready to
go but maybe in the next year or two I will be in
a position to uh offer such an online course uh
to people that's very exciting and I think it's a
a kind of a calculus that would have been in the
spirit of Oiler and lrange that they would approve
of this but it'll also have an interesting novel
orientation and of course have a important sort
of computational uh Focus so that's something to
keep in mind the algebraic calculus is coming uh
to a neighborhood near you and uh and that's a
very exciting development that's I think going to
really illustrate that not only are there serious
problems with the modern way of thinking about
things but there is really a better way okay
there is really a seriously better way of thinking
about a lot of the things that we are currently
basically waffling about and finally I would like
to give some thanks to various people who really
make it possible for me to do what I'm doing here
so I'd like to thank the Australian taxpayers to
whom I've dedicated this series ultimately I'm
uh an academic at a major Australian University
and that's supported by the Australian people uh
who deem that it's reasonable that people like
me can be supported to at least spend some of
their time thinking about abstract things and
leading to initiatives like my YouTube uh channel
so thanks very much Australian taxpayers I really
do appreciate your support indirect though it may
be I'd like to thank my wife and my daughter for
putting up with all my uh well constant YouTube
videoing so it's so it's great that they don't
object too strongly to me you know every so often
saying hey we need quiet time for a video Etc I'd
like to thank my colleagues at unsw my colleagues
know that I'm kind of heretic and they put up with
me in a a friendly kind of way and I think that's
really great I suspect that other disciplines uh
Mavericks feel more pressure to conform and uh so
I really do appreciate the sort of space that I'm
given and the tolerance that uh that is exhibited
to me I'd like to thank my patrons so I have a
patreon site where people can support my YouTube
channel and so I have some people supporting me
there my patrons thanks very much everyone that's
really uh appreciated and if you would like to
contribute well you can go to this uh site and
help support this revolution in thinking about
mathematics and finally General thanks to all my
viewers to all you people who are supporting me
by watching my videos and by making all kinds
of really valuable comments okay the comments
are great um I don't always agree with them that's
fine no problem as long as we're reasonably polite
I think it's great to have a robust discussion
and I really um I look forward to a lot more
discussions and interesting vigorous debate as we
move on towards repositioning modern mathematics
in my next video we are going to return
to this question of factoring numbers
and what happens when you divide one number
by another so of the problem of reciprocals
and the oiler totient function uh figures
prominently there interesting stuff there
I hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman
Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening
oh